NYPD Crime Data Prediction System
Overview
This project is a machine learning-based prediction system that analyzes 85,000+ NYPD crime records (2020-2023). It predicts suspects' age group, race, and sex using logistic regression models with softmax regression. The project cleans and processes 35+ columns of data and extracts temporal features to enhance predictive accuracy.

Features
Predictive modeling: Predicts suspect’s age group, race, and sex using softmax regression with logistic regression.
Comprehensive data preprocessing: Cleans and encodes 35+ columns, managing missing values and reorganizing data.
Balanced class weights: Improves predictions for underrepresented groups.
Feature extraction: Creates temporal features such as year, month, day, and weekday for better predictions.
Web integration potential: Future versions could incorporate results into a web-based interface using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
Technologies Used
Languages: Python, HTML, CSS, JavaScript
Libraries: pandas, numpy, scikit-learn
Tools: Jupyter Notebook, Conda environments
Operating Systems: Windows, MacOS, Linux, WSL
Setup & Installation
Clone the repository:


git clone <repository-url>
cd NYPD_Crime_Prediction
Set up a virtual environment:

conda create -n crime-prediction python=3.8
conda activate crime-prediction
Install the required libraries:


pip install pandas numpy scikit-learn
Prepare the dataset:


# Example: Predict suspect's age group
predicted_age_group = model.predict(X_test_age)
print(f"Predicted Age Group: {predicted_age_group}")
Dataset Overview
The dataset contains 85,000+ crime records (2020-2023) with the following columns:

Crime Details: Type of offense, law category, precinct, location type
Suspect & Victim Details: Age group, race, sex
Temporal Features: Year, month, day, hour, weekday
Geospatial Data: Latitude, longitude
Environment Details: Parks, housing developments, transit stations
Prediction Logic
Data Preprocessing:

Drops unnecessary columns and handles missing values.
Encodes categorical variables using one-hot encoding for compatibility with machine learning models.
Extracts time-based features from date and time columns.
Model Training:

Uses softmax regression via logistic regression to train models for age group, race, and sex prediction.
Balances class weights to improve accuracy for underrepresented groups.
Prediction:

Takes in crime details and outputs predictions for the suspect’s age group, race, and sex.
Future Enhancements
Web-based visualization: Integrate the system with a web interface using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
Geospatial analysis: Add heatmaps or clustering for crime hotspots based on latitude and longitude.
Interactive dashboards: Use tools like Plotly or Dash for real-time analytics and visualization.
Contributing
Contributions are welcome! Fork the repository and submit a pull request for any improvements or new features.

License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the LICENSE file for more details.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to the NYPD Open Data Portal for providing the dataset and enabling this project.

